\chapter*{Abstract}
%% The abstract is a brief description of your research project. It
%% should describe the problem being addressed, how you addressed it,
%% the results and conclusions reached.  The abstract may not contain
%% graphs, tables or illustrations. An English translation should be 
%% provided of an abstract in a foreign language.  The abstract must be
%% no more than 350 words, counting enumerations, numerals, articles,
%% and components of hyphenated compounds as one word each.  The line
%% spacing of the abstract should be the same as that chosen for the
%% text.  
Gravitational waves are ripples of space-time predicted by Einstein's
theory of General Relativity.  The Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO), part of a global network of
gravitational wave detectors, seeks to detect these waves and study
their sources.

The LIGO detectors were upgraded in 2008 with the dual goals of
increasing the sensitivity (and liklihood of detection) and proving
techniques for Advanced LIGO, a major upgrade currently underway.  As
part of this upgrade, the signal extraction technique was changed from
a heterodyne scheme to a form of homodyne detection called DC readout.
The DC readout system includes a new optical filter cavity, the output
mode cleaner, which removes unwanted optical fields at the
interferometer output port.

This work describes the implementation and characterization of the new
DC readout system and output mode cleaner, including the achieved
sensitivity, noise couplings, and servo control systems.

%% for word count:
%% grep --invert-match "^%%" abstract.tex | wc --words
